Latest, with ch4 (#18)
riscv-non-isa/riscv-security-model: specification/src/chapter3.adoc

MMU, PMP/ePMP, and sPMP are discussed later in this chapter.

==== PMA
https://github.com/riscv/riscv-isa-manual/releases/tag/Priv-v1.12[Privileged
ISA]

_Physical memory attributes (PMA)_ are intended to capture inherent properties of the underlying hardware. For example, read-only ROM regions, or non-cachable device regions. Often PMA can be fixed at design time or at boot, but sometimes runtime PMA can be required.

A separate hardware checker - _PMA checker_ - enforces PMA rules at runtime once a physical address is known. PMA rules are always checked on every physical access, and typically configured by region.

> Other RISC-V mechanisms can also be used for managing memory attributes. For example <<_mtt, MTT>> can provide finer grained dynamic PMA (svpam) at physical address level. Or <<_mmu, MMU>> TLB can be used by a kernel or hypervisor to manage memory attributes and permissions on a virtualized system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other RISC-V mechanisms can also be used for managing memory attributes. For example <<_mtt, MTT>> can provide finer grained dynamic meta-data (svpam) at physical address level. Or <<_mmu, MMU>> TLB can be used by a kernel or hypervisor to manage memory attributes and permissions on a virtualized system.
```

> Which mechanism is used depends on use case. They can be combined, in which case any memory access must pass all memory attribute checks.

Reviewer: what does it mean to pass memory attribute checks? PMA defines the memory behavior - perhaps you are mixing access-control checks with attributes?

Author: PMA is one mechanism for managing memory attributes (hardware attributes, at a granularity of a small(ish) number of regions). In practice defined at system reset.

Other mechanisms can also be used, including both better granularity and more dynamic, like svpam.

This whole area is a major weakness of RISC-V in my opinion. Other architectures do this at TLB level, with page granularity, with or without RME/GPT (MTT), with or without virtualization. Trying to achieve the same in RISC-V is ... challenging. 

Hence the discussion around PMA in other comments, for example. It might not be how the designers of RISC-V envisioned things like PMA being used, but that doesn't mean they can't be used in this way to work around shortcomings in the RISC-V architecture.

But that is a whole different discussion :-)

Reviewer: the comment still remains - what does it mean to pass memory attribute checks?

Author: I deleted the offending paragraph.

of privilege level (below M-mode). Isolation and context switching between
supervisor domains are managed by M-mode firmware.

> A supervisor domain is identified at architecture level by a _supervisor domain id (SDID)_ CSR, managed by M-mode firmware.

Reviewer 2: by a supervisor domain ID, managed by M-mode firmware (may not be a CSR itself).

Author: Fixed.

|===

NOTE: IOMTT can also be sufficient for protecting Root devices in the sense that M-mode can enforce that its own resources are never assigned to another domain. Use of IOPMP or similar still adds further protections. For example, a system may require that Root devices are not able to access memory assigned to TEE domain.

==== IOMMU

https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-iommu

> IOMMU is a system level component performing memory translation, allowing devices to access virtual memory locations. It complements MMU configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IOMMU is a system level component performing memory address translation from IO Virtual Address to Physical Address, allowing devices to access virtual memory locations. It complements MMU configurations.
```
